---
layout: post
title: Finding anagrams using Godel numbering and Randomization
published: false
---

This post is about a neat application of [Gödel numbering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del_numbering). This post is inspired by a question my friend was asked during an interview for Microsoft. 


Gödel numbering was invented by Kurt Gödel for the proof of his incompleteness theorems. Consider the alphabet $$ \Sigma =\{ a,b,c,d,...,z\} $$. Gödel numbering creates a one to one encoding scheme $$G: \Sigma^* \to N$$, by assigning to each symbol in the alphabet a positive integer $$a=1, b=2,...,z=26$$ and encodes strings by the product of successive primes raised to these powers.


$$G(x_1x_2...x_n) = 2^{x_1} \cdot 3^{x_2} \cdots p_n^{x_n}$$


So in theory, every string can be expressed as a natural number and every natural number can be broken down into a string by prime factorization. There are some practical limitations here:


 1. The numbers get very large very fast, representing them would be difficult. For example: $$G(abcd) = 2 \cdot 9 \cdot 125 \cdot 2401 = 5402250$$
 2. Integer Factorization is very difficult for large numbers. There is no efficient, non-quantum integer factorization algorithm for integer factorization. Moreover, it is not known exactly which complexity classes contain the decision version of the integer factorization problem.

Now the problem:

You are given a list of very large strings of equal length, where each string consists only of lower case alphabets. Group these strings into sets of anagrams. For example:


Input : $$[abcd,abde,acdb,ebad,bade]$$


Output: $$[abcd,acdb]$$ and $$[abde,ebad,bade]$$

Solution:
We want strings which are anagrams to have the same $$G$$ value. Applying the $$G$$ function directly wont work as it takes into consideration the location of the symbols as well. Ex:$$G(ab)=18$$ and $$G(ba)=12$$.

Consider this example: $$aaaaabbbbb,ababababab, aabbaabbab$$. These three strings are anagrams, all such anagrams could be represented as the multi-set $$\{a:5,b:5\}$$ . We need to design a function which would map from the set of multi-sets of $$\{a,b,c,..z\}$$ to $$N$$

Instead of assigning the values $$1,2,3,4,...,26$$, lets assign the values $$2,3,5,7,...,p_{26}$$ to $$a,b,c,d,...,z$$ respectively. So $$\{a:5,b:5\}=2^5\cdot3^5=7776$$

The new $$G$$ function we are using is this:

$$
G(x) = 2^{ \#a} \cdot 3^{ \#b} \cdot 5^{ \#c} \cdots p_{26}^{\#z}
$$

Where $$\#a$$ represents the number of $$a$$s in $$x$$.

Given a string $$x_1x_2...x_n$$, $$G(x_1x_2...x_n)$$ can be calculated in a single pass through the string as:

$$G(x_1x_2...x_n) = V[x_1]\cdot V[x_2] \cdots V[x_n]$$

Where $$V[x]$$ is the value assigned to the alphabet $$x$$, in this case $$p_x$$.

Considering the original example,  $$[abcd,abde,acdb,ebad,bade]$$.
applying the $$G$$ function to each string in this array we get $$[120,144,120,144,120]$$.  The strings having the same $$G$$ function value will be anagrams and they can be put in the respective sets in linear time.

A concise implementation in python would look like this:

    from operator import mul
	from collections import defaultdict
	primes=[2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, 59, 61, 67, 71, 73, 79, 83, 89, 97, 101]
	alphabets='abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'

	Values= dict(zip(alphabets, primes))

	def G(s):
		L = [Values[i] for i in s]
		return reduce(mul, L, 1)

	L=['abcd','abde','acdb','ebad','bade']
	V=[G(s) for s in L]


	d=defaultdict(list)
	for v,l in zip(V,L):
		d[v].append(l)

	print d.items()
	# [(210, ['abcd', 'acdb']), (462, ['abde', 'ebad', 'bade'])]
    
We still have to deal with large numbers, but there is a clever way of using Randomization to overcome this.

Let the size of the largest string in the list be $s$. So the largest possible value of the $G$ function could be $101^s$. The number of bits needed to represent this number in binary is $\log_{2}101^s \le 7s$. Let $z=7s$.

Choose a prime $P$ uniformly at random from the interval $[103,z^2] $ and use this number as a modulus for calculating the $G$ value of the strings. 

If $X$ and $Y$ are anagrams, then,$G(X) \pmod P = G(Y) \pmod P \quad \forall P \in Primes[103,z^2]$

In python this can be done by using this  function instead of the one above:

	def mod_mul(P):
		return lambda x,y:((x%P)*(y%P))%P
		
	def G(s,P):
		L = [Values[i] for i in s]
		return reduce(mod_mul(P), L, 1)

This may not always work.  If $X$ and $Y$ are not anagrams, then there might be some $P$ for which $G(X) \pmod P = G(Y) \pmod P $. In this case $P$ divides $\mid G(X)-G(Y)\mid$.  Since there is some probability of going wrong on a false instance, this is a one-sided Monte Carlo algorithm.

Lets find an upper bound of failing to find the right anagram sets. Consider a list of $l$ string, each of length $s$ and none of which are anagrams. Let $X$ and $Y$ be two strings in the list.

It can be shown that there are at most $z-1$ primes such that $P$ divides $\mid G(X)-G(Y)\mid$. Form the Prime number theorem, we have that the number of primes in the interval $[2,m]$ approaches $m/ \ln m$ as $m$ approaches infinity. So the probability of choosing a prime $P$ which will group $X$ and $Y$ as anagrams is :
 $$\frac{z-1}{z^2/\ln z^2} \le \frac{2\ln z}{z}$$

As the size of the list is $l$, there exist ${l \choose 2}$ such pairs of $X$ and $Y$. Using a simple union bound, we can upper bound the probability of failure:

$$Prob(failure) \le {l \choose 2}  \frac{2\ln z}{z} \le l^2 \frac{\ln z}{z}$$

Hence we have $Prob(failure) \le 1/2$ for 	
$$l \le \sqrt{\frac{z}{2\ln z}}$$
We can run this algorithm $k$ times, each time choosing a random prime between 103 and $z^2$ and amplify the success probability.

