---
layout: post
title: Human Activity Recognition in Temporally Untrimmed Videos
published: true
project: true
---

This was my undergraduate thesis project. My project supervisor was [Prof.Partha Pratim Das](http://cse.iitkgp.ac.in/~ppd/). I worked on the problem of detecting and recognizing human activities in untrimmed videos. 

Activity recognition, which is a straightforward task for humans is difficult for computer systems as it involves processing large volumes of information and recognizing patterns from spatial and temporal domains. Deep Learning models such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have achieved significant accuracies on activity recognition datasets which consist of short videos consisting of a single activity. We address the task of recognizing activities in longer temporally untrimmed videos by splitting the task into two subtasks. The first subtask uses a Deep Neural network for predicting the temporal extents of the activities present in long videos. The second subtask again uses a Deep Neural network for recognizing activity occurring in the predicted extents. We analyse our models on a subset of the UCF-101 and Thumos-15 datasets.

You can find my thesis here: [Human Activity Recognition in Temporally Untrimmed Videos](http://sudeepraja.github.io/sudeep_BTP.pdf)

I also gave two lectures about my work at the Deep Learnining Reading group in IIT Kharagpur.

The first one was on various neural network architectures for processing videos.
<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1DyIW0qpZZCSDaM7252xApc_ZevN45VgeQmCUcD8di-s/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000" frameborder="0" width="960" height="569" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe>

The second one was a hands-on tutorial about using Keras for training netwroks.
